Human Anatomy & Physiology I Syllabus
Sixteen-Week On-Campus Term
BIO 1314TRO1&2; BIO 1314TRO 3&4; BIO 1314TRO 7&8
Fall 2026
Instructor Information
Professor
Email
Office Location & Hours
Robyn Senter
Phone
405-682-1611 ext. 7271
SEM Division Phone & Location
405-682-7508, SEM2E6
Robyn.m.senter@occc.edu
Office: SEM2B4E
Office Hours: M/W 12:30-1:00; T/TH 12:30-4:00
General Information
Course Description
Through a systematic study of the structure and function of the human body, its cells, tissues, organs and systems, the student will identify and describe basic anatomical structures and fundamental physiological processes that occur in health and disease for the major body systems. Laboratory work, which may require dissection, is an integral and required part of the course.
Course Objectives
Using lectures and laboratory activities, the student will be able to:
1.Properly apply anatomical terminology when discussing anatomical and physiological aspects of the human body.
2.Demonstrate the application of selected chemical principles as a basis for understanding the structural and functional relationships of the human body and its parts as they pertain to varying levels of organization.
3.Describe the organelles, functions, and processes of the living cell, and evaluate the importance of each in the function of organ systems and the human body.
4.Demonstrate the ability to correlate normal anatomical and specified physiological attributes of the following systems as they pertain to health and disease:
Integumentary SystemSkeletal System Nervous SystemMuscular System
5.Discuss the operation and influence of control and feedback mechanisms used to integrate the activities of body organs and systems and assure homeostasis during normal conditions and evaluate their activity and response to abnormal situations.
Course Materials
Required Texts
Anatomy & Physiology: The Unity of Form and Function, 10th edition, 2024, Saladin
Human Anatomy & Physiology I Laboratory Manual, OCCC Custom Edition, 2022, McGraw-Hill
Connect access is required for this course.
Computer or Chromebook with reliable internet access(Note: tablets or other mobile devices will not work.)
Optional
A Visual Analogy Guide to Human Anatomy& Human Physiology, third edition, 2017, Krieger
Day One Access
BIO 1314 courses are participating in the OCCC “Day One Access” program. This program prevents you from searching for your textbook online and you are getting the best price possible.A digital version of your required textbook and Connect access will be available as soon as the course opens in Moodle. (You will only need to visit the bookstore to purchase a lab manual.)  Once logged into your class on Moodle, simply click the “Connect” link to access the digital textbook and Connect assignments.
Areboth this textbook and Connect access free? No. Unless you opt out, the cost of this textbook will be added to your bursar account. The materials are required for the class, but during the first week, you will have the option to “opt out” of the “Day One Access” program. You will receive an email with this option. If you choose to opt out, you will be required to purchase the text and Connect access on your own at full price from McGraw Hill for approximately $120.00 plus tax.
If you already have Connect access for BIO 1314 (for example, if you are retaking the course and the code is still active) you will need to opt out or you will be charged a second time. If you are unsure if you have existing access, you can call McGraw Hill’s tech support at 1-800-331-5094 during the first week to verify the status of your account.
Course Rules
Biology courses are among the most challenging courses offered at Oklahoma City Community College & require constant attention & hard work. These instructions will help facilitate your success in BIO1314 Human Anatomy & Physiology I.
Assessments for individual or combined unit exams & lab tests may only be taken once. All make-up exams must be completed no later than one week after the missed exam date and only with a documented excuse that is submitted PRIOR to the missed exam, otherwise a 10% deduction will be assessed.Each examination or lab test will be administered in class/lab on the date listed in the schedule or announced by your professor. The last lecture exam of the semester will be comprehensive. Comprehensive questions will have the same format as the questions related to the objectives in the unit exams.
If you miss your scheduled lab period, make-up laboratory work is allowed with your professor’s permission. Make-up work must also be completed during the week of the scheduled lab exam date established by the lab schedule unless extenuating circumstances arise which must be approved by your professor. Contact your professor as soon as you are aware of a need to miss or make up lab work. Failure to do so may result in makeup work not being allowed.
The Biology Science Center (BSC) is designed to accommodate the laboratory needs of students in this course. Students may work individually or in groups to review lab materials prior to exams, view audio-visual materials, access the internet & receive assistance from qualified tutors to work with students in the course. Except for viewing videos, accessing the internet & studying, students wishing to use BSC resources can schedule a time 24 hours or more in advance. No scheduling is done by telephone. Once requested activities are approved by the lab assistant on duty, the availability of a work area & the required lab materials (other than computers) will be reserved at the scheduled time. Cell phones are to be turned OFF while working in lab, in the BSC & in lecture. Disruptive activities, food, or beverages are prohibited in lab & in the BSC. To use the BSC, students must have a current OCCC student ID card & log in through the BSC computer tracking system. Students will not be allowed to begin activities which cannot be completed by the scheduled closing times. Should activities not be completed within the scheduled time block, the student will be required to schedule another time for completion of the work. Information about BSC policies & procedures, operating hours & tutoring schedules is available in the BSC.
Abuse of the BSC may result in loss of usage privileges.
Center. Academic dishonesty in the BSC, in class or in lab will
result in a zero on the exam & may result in course withdrawal.
The instructor will make every attempt to reply to student emails within one workday (Monday-Friday, excluding holidays) and to have exams graded and enteredin Moodle within five business days, but will inform students if more time is required.
Biology Department Course Grading Criteria
BIO1314 Human Anatomy & Physiology –16 week fall 2026 Course Points
Unit Exams5 x 110 points each =   550
Lab Exams5 x 50 points each=   250
Unit Study Guides5 x 15 points each=     75
Lecture Quizzes5 x 20 points each=   100
Lab Homework5 x 15 points each =     75
Total Points= 1050
Levels of performance (average of all written exams, lab tests & quizzes).
A = (4.0 GPA)   90 -100.0% = 945 - 1050 points
B = (3.0 GPA)   80 - 89.9% = 840 – 944 points
C = (2.0 GPA)   70 - 79.9% = 735 - 839 points
D = (1.0 GPA)   60 - 69.9% = 630– 734 points
F = (0.0 GPA)   00 - 59.9% = 000 – 629 points
This is simple math. You are earning points with each assignment/exam. Your final grade is determined by dividing the number of points you have earned by the total number of points available in the course.
A final course grade of “C” or better in BIO 1314 is required for enrollment in BIO 1414.
Assessments (exams/quizzes) may only be taken once. I will and do round grades if they are 0.5 or higher. For example, if a student has a 76.52% on a lecture exam, I will round up to 77%. I will also round up for a final grade. If a student has an 89.5%(B) as a final grade I will record the final grade as a 90% (A).
Your selected level of performance should correspond to your program requirements or personal needs. Check with your advisor to be aware of any specific requirementsrelated to GPA or minimum grades acceptable for specific programs. Levels of competency are established by the OCCC biology faculty as departmental policy.
Course Withdrawal “W”
It is the student’s responsibility to withdraw from the course.Students will receive the letter grade earned at the end of the semester if they have not withdrawn. Students should maintain a record of their scores to make the best decision about withdrawal.You officially withdraw from a class by submitting a drop form in theOffice of Records and Graduation Services, or by dropping the classon OCCC portal. Withdrawals do not count toward your GPA. However,withdrawals may negatively impact your eligibility for federalstudent financial assistance. Remember, there is a deadline forwithdrawing for each semester or term. Your professors cannot dropyou from any class.The deadline for withdrawal is the Friday of the twelfth week of a sixteen-week semester and the Friday of the sixth week of an eight-week semester.Your professors cannot dropyou from any class.
Attendance & Learning Responsibility
The college’s approach to education emphasizes the students’ acceptance of responsibility for their learning. Students are expected to make maximum use of learning opportunities available to them. If a student is not making adequate use of these experiences, faculty may choose to refer the student to the OCCC Retention Alert System or to the Division Dean for one or more of the following reasons:
•The student is not attending class meetings and has failed to contact the professor to make other arrangements.
•The student is making inadequate effort to progress in the course and has a minimal chance of course completion in the opinion of the professor.
•In the professor’s opinion, the student has not effectively used the learning experiences.
•Due to family/employment responsibilities, the student cannot achieve course objectives.
•Without further consultation or explanation, the student has not met major deadlines agreed upon with the professor.
The Division Dean may recommend to the students the following action:
•A reduction in the student’s course load.
•Withdrawal from a course or courses.
•Suspension of further work in a course or courses until a later semester.
Examination Policy: Students are required to complete assignments for each unit based on the stated objectives. All homework assignments, lecture quizzes, lecture exams and lab exams must be taken in class or as directed by the instructor. There are no re-tests for lecture quizzes, lecture exams or lab exams.
Students who arrive after an exam has begun will receive a 5% deduction from their exam grade, regardless of the reason.  Additional time will not be granted to complete the exam. This policy is intended to minimize disruptions and maintain a focused testing environment.
Students are not allowed to use any electronic devices during quizzes or exams to include, cell phones, ear phones or ear buds, laptops, smart watches or smart glasses. Students caught cheating during a lecture quiz, lecture exam or lab exam will forfeit the opportunity to complete the activity and a grade of zero will be assigned. Students will not be allowed to make up the activity. Students who are caught cheating a second time will be issued a failing grade for the course. The student will be referred to the department chair, and may be referred to the Vice President of Academic Affairs for further consequences.
Exams must be taken on or by the scheduled day and time. A missed exam will result in a grade of zero unless one of the following applies:
Prior arrangement has been made with the instructor
Jury duty (documentation required)
A legitimate doctor’s excuse (must be submitted)
Make up exams may be considered for lecture exams only and are reserved for extenuating circumstances.
Approved make up exams must be completed within five (5) business days of the originally scheduled date and taken during my office hours.  Failure to do so will result in a grade of zero. A 10 (ten) point deduction will be applied to any make up exam taken after the original scheduled date, regardless of the reason. If the exam is not completed within five business days of original exam date, the student will forfeit the opportunity to make up the exam. Students may make up one exam. If a student misses more than one exam all other missed exams will be recorded as a zero.
Lab exams may only be made up if prior arrangements have been made with the instructor.
Exam Review:
Students are responsible for scheduling a time to review their exam during my office hours. This opportunity is available for one week following the exam. After that period, exams will no longer be available for review.
Lab Attendance Policy
Laboratories are a critical aspect of this course. Failure to attend your scheduled lab periods will seriously affect your final grade. Missing one lab period will not incur a point penalty. After that, each missed lab period will result in a 10% deduction from your final grade. This means that for every missed lab period, your final grade will drop by a letter grade. (The only possible exception, at the instructor's discretion, is if the student communicates with the instructor PRIOR to missing lab and provides documentation of an extenuating circumstance, such as jury duty, military orders, COVID-19.)  If three lab periods have been missed, you will receive an automatic F in the course. Note that leaving prior to dismissal by your instructor or leaving before your lab station has been thoroughly cleaned counts as missing a lab period.No visitorsare allowed in the lecture room or in the lab room.
Class Schedule Changes
Changes in the class schedule, the sequence of activities, course policies, or course materials may be made at the discretion of the professor or to facilitate the instructional process. These changes are the professional responsibility of the faculty member assigned to teach each section of the class. When changes are necessary, students will receive notification from the professor before the changes are effective.
Future Semesters Starting Fall 2024
Course Registration: Effective with the Fall 2024 semester, all students are required to establish an approved payment arrangement with the College to cover tuition and fees. Multiple payment options are available; however, students are strongly encouraged to enroll in a monthly payment plan at the time of registration. Students whose balances are not fully satisfied through financial aid or third-party sponsorship must participate in a College payment plan. Students who fail to self-enroll in a plan by the conclusion of the first week of classes will be automatically enrolled in one by the College. All outstanding balances must be paid in full by the end of each academic term. Students who carry an unpaid balance at the end of a term will be administratively unenrolled from future semester courses prior to the start of the subsequent term.
Course Attendance/Never Attend: If students do not attend a course from the beginning, including concurrent students, they will becounted as a “never attend”, withdrawn from the class, and charged $100.00 for each course. Your faculty member will give you specific details about what constitutes attendance.
For more information about these policy changes, payment plan options, dates for withdrawal for not providing a plan for payment, and any charges, please contact the Bursar Office: https://www.occc.edu/bursar/.
Accommodations Statement
Oklahoma City Community College complies with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act & the Americans with Disabilities Act. Students with disabilities who seek academic adjustments/accommodations must make their request by contacting the Office of Student Accessibility and Support located on the first floor of the main building near SEM entry 3 or by calling 405-682-7520. All academic adjustments/accommodations must be approved by the Disability Support Services team within the office of Student Accessibility and Support (SAS). You can also go tohttps://www.occc.edu/support/disability/for more information about disability accommodations.
If you have been approved by the Disability Support Services team within SAS to receive academic accommodations, you will be able to request your accommodation letter be sent via email to your professors via your Disability Support portal. It is important that you speak with me either in person, via email, or by phone about your accommodations. This will allow me to be better informed on how to assist you with access during the semester. To respect your privacy, I WILL NOT approach you, but the academic accommodations must be discussed to ensure ideal implementation for you. All information will remain confidential.
Pregnancy and ParentingIn alignment with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Oklahoma City Community College (OCCC) provides reasonable accommodations to students who are new parents, pregnant, recently experienced childbirth, and/or have medical needs related to childbirth (such as, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, or recovery, etc.). Pregnant and parenting students may request accommodations or adjustments by completing the new Parenting and Pregnancy Accommodations and Adjustments Request Form. Students may also work directly with their instructors, departments, or supervisors for minor adjustments. Additionally, no student should be discriminated against or excluded from an educational program or activity due to their pregnancy or parenting status. If any student has questions, needs assistance with pregnancy-related accommodations/adjustments request, or wishes to file a complaint, please contact the Title IX Coordinator by emailingreporting@occc.edu. For additional information, please see the Office of Compliance, Accountability, and Title IX website and OCCC No. 1013 Pregnancy and Parenting Policy.
Title IXOklahoma City Community College (OCCC) is committed to helping create a safe and open learning environment for all students. If you (or someone you know) have experienced any form of sexual misconduct, including sexual assault, dating or domestic violence, or stalking, know that help and support are available. The College strongly encourages all members of the community to take action, seek support, and report incidents of sexual misconduct to the Office of Compliance, Accountability, and Title IX. If you should need assistance, please contact theTitle IX Coordinator by emailingreporting@occc.edu. You may also submit a report.
Copyright
Lectures and course materials in this course are protected by United States copyright law (Title 17, US Code).   Uploading copyrighted course material to any Artificial Intelligence (AI) site may be considered a violation of copyright law unless prior written permission from the course instructor has been given.
Criminal Convictions
Students interested in medical careers should be advised that some criminal convictions (misdemeanors, felonies, or both) may prevent them from participating in certain aspects of their career.Often, background checks will be conducted by the professional school prior to their required participation in clinical rotations, & by a future employer prior to employment.
Nondiscrimination Statement
As a recipient of federal financial assistance for education activities, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 requires the College to ensure that allof its education programs and activities do not discriminate based on sex/gender. Sex includes sex, sex stereotypes, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, and pregnancy or parenting status. The College also prohibits retaliation against any person opposing discrimination or participating in any discrimination investigation or complaint process internal or external to the institution. Sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating and domestic violence, and stalking are forms of sex discrimination, which are prohibited under Title IX and by College policy. Any member of the campus community, guest, or visitor who acts to deny, deprive, or limit the educational, employment, or social access, opportunities and/or benefits of any member of the College on the basis of sex is in violation of OCCC College Policy No. 1012.
Spelling and Symmetry Policy
As spelling is an essential element of science, you will be responsible for spelling correctly the following:
1.Words to be defined as stated in the objectives.
2.Terms to be used in identification as stated in objectives or supplemental materials.
3.Terms used in biological processes that are stated in objectives or supplemental materials.
4.Scientific names.
Each term that is not spelled correctly will count off ¼ of a point from each test question score with a maximum of ¼ point deduction taken per exam question.
Similarly, failure to correctly specify left or right for structures possessing bilateral symmetry will result in a reduction of ¼ of a point from each test question.
Course Learning Objectives
Unit 1 – Introduction to the Human Body
1. Explain the difference between anatomy & physiology. (Chapter1, Section 1.1)
2. Distinguish between the various levels of structural organization within the body including: (Chapter 1, Section 1.5, and Figure 1.5)
atomorganelletissueorgan system
moleculecellorganorganism
3. Distinguish between examples of homeostasis and stress. (Chapter 1, Section 1.6C)
4. Explain the components of feedback systems. (Chapter1, Section 1.6C; Figures 1.7, 1.8)
5. Using examples, explain the operation and effects of negative and positive feedback systems on homeostasis. (Chapter 1, Sections 1.6C and 1.6D; Figure 1.9)
6. Given various functions and organs of the body, identify the following body systems: (Appendix A, Figure A.9)
integumentarynervouslymphaticurinary
skeletalendocrinedigestivereproductive
muscularcardiovascularrespiratory
7. Describe the scientific method and inductive reasoning, including the following terms: (Chapter 1, Section 1.3)
observationexperimentationcontrol groupconclusions
hypothesisvariablesexperimental grouppeer review
theoryplacebo
8. Apply the scientific method to a biological problem. (Chapter 1, Section 1.3)
Unit 2 – The Chemical Level of Organization
1. Define the following: (Chapter 2, Section 2.1)
matterisotopecationhydrogen bond
elementmoleculeanionpH
atomnonpolar moleculefree radicalacid
subatomic structurecompoundantioxidantbase
atomic numberpolar moleculeionic bondsalt
atomic massion (electrolyte)covalent bond
2. Given concentrations of acids and/or bases, identify their chemical composition, relative position on the pH scale and examples. (Chapter 2, Section 2.2C, Figure 2.11)
3. Explain the various homeostatic mechanisms for regulating the pH of the body, including the roles of buffers, the respiratory system, and the urinary system in regulating the normal pH of arterial blood. (Chapter 24, Section 24.3)
4. Associate the properties of water with their importance to the body, including the following: (Chapter 2, Section 2.2A)
polaritycapillary actionhigh heat of vaporization
adhesionsurface tensionuniversal solvent
cohesionhigh specific heatchemical reactivity
5. Identify the subunits, examples, and general functions of the following organic compounds and processes by which they are metabolized: (Chapter 2, Section 2.3B, Section 2.4)
carbohydratesmonosaccharidesnucleotides
lipidsfatty acidsadenosine triphosphate (ATP)
proteinsglyceroldehydration synthesis
nucleic acidsamino acidshydrolysis
6. Explain how enzymes work and why they are so important to the body, including the following: (Chapter 2, Section 2.4F; Figures 2.26 & 2.27)
catalystsubstrateeffects of pH
energy of activationproducteffects of temperature
active site
Unit 3 – The Cell: Structure/Function, Membranes, Water, and Homeostasis
1. Identify the principal parts of a cell and their functions, including: (Chapter 3, Sections 3.1C, 3.2C, 3.4)
plasma (cell) membraneendoplasmic reticulumcentrioles
cytoplasmGolgi complexmicrotubule
nucleusvacuolemicrofilaments
nuclear membranelysosomecytoskeleton
chromosomes (chromatin)ribosomecilium
nucleolusmitochondrionflagellum
2. Given illustrations of the plasma membrane and its structures, identify the chemical nature of the components and their functions. (Chapter 3, Sections 3.2A, 3.2B, 3.3E; Figures 3.5, 3.7, & 3.8)
3. Compare and contrast the forms of membrane transport, including the following: (Chapter 3, Sections 3.3A, 3.3B, 3.3E, 3.3F)
diffusionfiltrationphagocytosis
facilitated diffusionendocytosisexocytosis
osmosispinocytosissodium/potassium pump
passive/active
4. Explain the roles of osmosis, dissolved electrolytes, and osmotic pressure in cell homeostasis and imbalances, including the following: (Chapter 3, Sections 3.3C & 3.3D; Figures 3.14 & 3.15)
solutionisotonicturgor dehydration
solventhypertoniclyseedema
solutehypotoniccrenatesemipermeable membrane
5. List three general functions of ions in the body.(Chapter 24, Section 24.2 introduction)
6. Identify the symbol and chargefor the following ions:(Chapter 24, Section 24.2 introduction)
sodiumcalciumphosphatebicarbonate
potassiummagnesiumchloride
7. Given statements, select those which are characteristic of intracellular fluid (ICF) and extracellular fluid (ECF) with respect to specific body fluids, relative amounts of water, and predominant ions.(Chapter 24, Section 24.1A & Figure 24.7)
8. Indicate the relevance of the solute concentration of normal saline (NS), physiological saline (PSS), and Ringer’s solution to body fluids.(Chapter 24, Deeper insight 24.2)
Unit 4 – Nucleic Acids, Protein Synthesis, and The Cell Cycle
1. Distinguish at least three similarities and differences in the molecular structure of DNA and RNA. (Chapter 4, Section 4.1 & 4.2)
2. Given a sequence of DNA or RNA bases, describe a complementary DNA and RNA strand. (Chapter 4, Section 4.1A)
3. Describe the process of DNA replication, including the roles of DNA nucleotides and DNA polymerase. (Chapter 4, Section 4.3A)
4. Identify the sequence of events involved in protein synthesis, which includes the roles of: (Chapter 4, Sections 4.2B, 4.2C, 4.2D)
DNAamino acidscodon
mRNARNA polymeraseanticodon
tRNApeptide bondscomplementary base pairing
rRNARNA nucleotidestranscription
ribosomestriplet codetranslation
5. From figures or descriptions, identify sequential stages of the cell cycle. (Chapter 4, Section 4.3C, 4.3D, Figures 4.14 and 4.15)
6. Describe the main events associated with each stage, including: (Chapter 4, Section 4.3C, 4.3D, Figures 4.14 and 4.15)
interphaseG2 phasemetaphasecytokinesis
G1 phasemitosisanaphaseG0 phase
S phaseprophasetelophase
7. Evaluate the significance of mitosis with respect to maintaining a constant chromosome complement, increasing the number of cells in the body, and overall cellular homeostasis. (Chapter 4, Section 4.3D, 4.3E)
8. Interpret cancer as a homeostasis imbalance of the cell cycle. (Chapter 4, Section 4.3E, Deeper Insight 4.3)
Unit 5 – Medical Genetics
1. Explain the functions of meiosis and the significance of each. (Chapter 27, Section 27.4A & Figure 27.13)
2. Compare and contrast mitosis and meiosis, including the events of prophase I and the difference between the way chromosomes line up in metaphase I of meiosis and metaphase of mitosis. (Chapter 27, Section 27.4A & Figure 27.13)
3. State the significance of the difference between the way chromosomes line up in metaphase I of meiosis and metaphase of mitosis. (Chapter 27, Section 27.4A & Figure 27.13)
4. Utilize the following genetic terms: (Chapter 4, Section 4.2A, 4.4A, 4.4B, 4.4C – Be sure to examine all figures.)
geneheterozygousphenotype
allelehomozygouscodominant
dominanthomologous chromosomeskaryotype
recessivegenotype
5. Construct a Punnett square to determine genotypes, phenotypes, and genotypic and phenotypic ratios for crosses between given inheritable traits. (Chapter 4, Section 4.2A, 4.4A, 4.4B, 4.4C – Be sure to examine all figures.)
6. Explain the difference between autosomal and the sex linked to inheritance, including examples of each. (Chapter 4, Section 4.4A, 4.4E, 4.4G; Chapter 27, Section 27.1C)
7. Name the sex chromosomes that are present in male and female cells, indicating which one(s) can be present in sperm and ova. (Chapter 4, Section 4.4A, 4.4E, 4.4G; Chapter 27, Section 27.1C)
8. Define mutation. (Chapter 4, Section 4.3B)
9. Describe three types of mutations. (Chapter 4, Section 4.3B)
10. Identify at least three agents that may produce mutations. (Chapter 4, Section 4.3B)
11. Analyze the relationship between a gene, the genetic code, and genetic diseases. (Chapter 4, Section 4.3B)
12. Explain nondisjunction, including when it occurs and how it relates to monosomy and trisomy. (Chapter 29, Section 29.3C)
13. Recognize the following conditions, including any genetic or karyotypic abnormalities and the typical phenotypic characteristics associated with each: (Chapter 29, Section 29.3C; Chapter 18, Section 18.5F; Chapter 6, Section 6.1e; Chapter 18, Section 18.2e; Chapter 16, Section 16.5h)
normal malenormal female
Down Syndrome (trisomy 21)Klinefelter syndrome
Turner syndrome (monosomy 23)albinism
Patau syndrome (trisomy 13)phenylketonuria (PKU disease)
Edward syndrome (trisomy 18)sickle cell anemia
hemophiliacolor blindness
hemophiliacolor blindness
Unit 6 – The Integumentary System, Skeletal System, and Joints
1. Identify the characteristics, the location of, and the fluids produced by the four body membrane types: cutaneous, mucous, serous, and synovial. (Chapter 5, Section 5.5c)
2. Identify the major functions of the integumentary system.(Chapter 6, Section 6.1a)
3. Explain the composition and function of the two layers of the skin, including the following (Chapter 6, Section 6.1b & c):
epidermisstratum corneumkeratinocytes
dermisstratum spinosummelanocytes
hypodermisstratum basaleMerkel cells
4. Distinguish between the derivatives of the epidermis, including the following (Chapter 5, Section 5.5b & Chapter 6, Section 6.2a, b, & c):
hairsebaceous glandsapocrine glands
hair folliclenailseccrine glands
arrector pilisudoriferous glands
5. Identify the functions of the skeletal system (Chapter 7, Section 7.1a).
6. Identify the following gross features of a long bone, including the location and the function(s) of the following (Chapter 7, Section 7.1c & e):
epiphysisepiphyseal plate/line            periosteum            nutrient foramen
diaphysiscompact bone            endosteum            yellow marrow
medullary cavity spongy bone            articular cartilage      red marrow
7. Differentiate between spongy and compact bone, including location, function, and the following histological features (Chapter 7, Section 7.2a, c, &d):
osteocytescanaliculuslamellaosteon
lacunamatrixcentral (Haversian) canaltrabeculae
8. Explain the hormonal mechanism of calcium homeostasis, including the roles of the following (Chapter 7, Section 7.2 a, 7.4b &d):
osteoclaststhyroidcalcitonin
osteoblaststestosteroneparathyroid hormone (PTH)
calcitriol (vitamin D3)estrogen   human growth hormone (hGH)
9. Compare and contrast the events associated with intramembranous and endochondral ossification and the types of bones formed by each (Chapter 7, Section 7.3 a & b).
10. Identify the physiological mechanisms for bone growth or remodeling in length and diameter (Chapter 7, Section 7.3 c & 7.4a).
11. Relate the cause and disease process for rickets, osteomalacia, and osteoporosis to homeostatic imbalances.(Chapter 7, Section 7.3deeper insight).
12. Differentiate between the characteristics of fibrous, cartilaginous, and synovial joints, including examples of each (Chapter 9, Section 9.1 a, b & c).
13. Distinguish between the following synovial joints, including examples of (Chapter 9, Section 9.2 a, only classes of synovial joints):
ball & socketcondyloidsaddle
hingepivotplane
14. Identify the functions of the following (Chapter 9, Section 9.2 a):
ligamentbursaarticular disc (meniscus)
intervertebral disctendon articular cartilage
15. Identify the following components, including their roles in joint stability and movement (Chapter 9, Section 9.2 a):
articular cartilagemeniscussynovial membrane
cruciate ligamentsbursaesynovial fluid
collateral ligamentssynovial cavity
16. Identify the cause(s) and pathological characteristics of the following joint disorders (Chapter 9, Table 9.1):
bursitisosteoarthritisstrainslipped (herniated) disc
tendonitisgouty arthritissprainrheumatoid arthritis (RA)
Unit 7 – Neuroanatomy and Neurophysiology
1. State the general purpose of the nervous system using the terms receptors, integrating center, and effectors (Chapter 1, Section 1.6c).
2. Differentiate between the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system, including the following terms (Chapter 12, Section 12.1 & 12.2b):
nerveefferent (motor) nervessomatic motor nerves
ganglionafferent (sensory) nervesautonomic motor nerves
3. Identify the three universal properties of neurons and the three classes in which they are grouped (Chapter 12, Section 12.2a, b).
4. Identify the six types of neuroglia, including their functions (Chapter 12, Section 12.3a, b & c)
5. Identify the following parts of a neuron, including their functions (Chapter 12, Section 12.2c):
cell bodydendriteaxonnodes of Ranvier
nucleus receptorsaxon terminalsneurilemma
Nissl bodiesaxon hillockSchwann cell myelin sheath
6. Explain how a nerve impulse is initiated and propagated along a neuron, including the following terms (Chapter 12, Section 12.4):
resting membrane potentialpotassium ions
local (graded) potentialNa+ channels
action potential K+ channels
stimulusNa+/K+ pump
thresholdrefractory period
depolarizationnodes of Ranvier
repolarizationsaltatory conduction
hyperpolarizationcalcium ions
sodium ions
7. Using the terms above, recognize the role of each in neural activity (Chapter 12, Section 12.4).
8. Explain how a nerve impulse is propagated from one neuron to the next, including the following terms(Chapter 12, Section 12.5 &12.6a, b, c, & d):
synapseacetylcholine (ACh)
presynaptic & postsynaptic membraneconvergent synapse
voltagegated channelsdivergent synapse
neurotransmitters (excitatory & inhibitory)spatial summation
chemically gated channelstemporal summation
excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP)proprioception
inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP)anesthetic
9. Using the terms above, recognize the role of each in neural activity (Chapter 12, Section 12.5 &12.6a, b,c,& d).
Unit 8 – Central Nervous System Anatomy and Physiology
1. Identify a spinal cord cross-section depicting a simple reflex arc, including the following (Chapter 13, Section 13.1d):
sensory (afferent) neuroncentral canalventral (anterior) rootposterior horn
motor (efferent) neurongray matterdorsal (posterior) rootanterior horn
synapsewhite matterdorsal root ganglioninterneuron
2. Recognize the sequence of events which occur during the utilization of a reflex arc (Chapter 13, Section 13.3).
3. Identify the following on a diagram of the brain, including the function of each (Chapter 14, Sections14.1a,b; Section14.2a,b; 14.3a,b,e;Sections 14.4a,b; section 14.5c,d,e,f,g,h,i):
cerebrumparietal lobechoroid plexus
cerebral hemispheretemporal lobethalamus
longitudinal fissureoccipital lobehypothalamus
corpus callosummotor area of the cerebral cortexpituitary gland
cerebral cortexassociation areas of the cerebral cortexoptic chiasma
basal nucleisensory area of the cerebral cortexmeninges
gray mattercerebellumdura mater
white matterbrainstemarachnoid mater
gyrusmidbrainpia mater
sulcusponsventricles
frontal lobemedulla oblongata
central sulcuscerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
4. Identify the principal arteries that supply blood to the brain (Chapter 14, Section 14.2c).
5. Indicate the role of a blood brain barrier, glucose requirements, and the special oxygen requirements of the brain (Chapter 14, Section 14.2c).
6. Identify the cranial nerves, including name, Roman numeral, composition (sensory, motor, or both), and function (Chapter 14, Section 14.2c).
7. Identify the cause and prognosis for the following diseases (Chapter 12, Deep insight 12.4; Chapter 14, Section 14 Table14.2& Section Deeper insight 14.1 &14.2):
strokecerebral palsyAlzheimer’s disease      meningitis
hydrocephalusepilepsyParkinson's disease
Unit 9 – Autonomic Nervous System/ Anatomy and Physiology of the Eye/Ear
1. Identify the functions of the autonomic nervous system (ANS), the two main divisions of the autonomic nervous system, and their functions (Chapter 15, Section 15.2a, b).
2. Differentiate between the sympathetic and parasympathetic through: their origins; their general anatomy and ganglia; the types of nerve fibers and receptors each use; the neurotransmitters released by each; and the differences in their actions on visceral targets (Chapter 15, Sections15.2 & 15.3).
3. Explain the action of cholinergic and adrenergic blocking agents, including an example of each (Chapter 15, SectionsDeeper insight 15.2).
4. Differentiate the function of the following terms, including examples of each (Chapter 16, Sections16.1 & 16.2):
chemoreceptorsmechanoreceptorsnociceptorstonic
thermoreceptorsphotoreceptorsphasic
5. Given a diagram of the eye, identify the following structures and their functions (Chapter 16, Sections16.5a, b,c):
conjunctivaciliary bodysensory tunicanterior segment
fibrous tunicciliary processretinaaqueous humor
scleraciliary musclefovea centraliscanal of Schlemmcorneasuspensory ligamentsmacula luteaanterior chambervascular tunicirisoptic discposterior chamberchoroidpupiloptic nerveposterior segment
vitreous humorlens
6. Explain the role of rods, cones, and visual pigments in vision (Chapter 16, Sections16.5e & f):
7. Recall each of the following and a type of correction, if any (Chapter 16, Sections16.5d):
myopiapresbyopiaastigmatism
hyperopiaaccommodationemmetropia
8. Cite potential causes and the pathology associated with the following disorders (Chapter 16, Deeper insight Sections16.3):
cataractglaucomamacular degeneration
conjunctivitisnight blindnesscolor blindness
9. Given a diagram of the ear, identify the following and their functions (Chapter 16, Sections16.4b & c):
auricle (pinna)oval windowvestibular apparatus
external auditory canalcochleasaccule
tympanic membraneorgan of Cortiutricle
malleusvestibulocochlear nervemacula
incusround windowsemicircular canals
stapeseustachian tubecrista ampullaris
10. Sequence the events that occur in the ear during hearing (Chapter 16, Sections16.4b& c).
11. Explain how the ear participates in equilibrium, using the correct structures & terms.(Chapter 16, Sections16.d)
Unit 10 – Muscle Physiology
1. Identify the functions of muscles (Chapter 10, Sections10.1a).
2. Identify the characteristics of muscle tissue (Chapter 11, Sections11.1a).
3. Recognize three types of muscle tissue, including their locations, response speed, and control (voluntary or involuntary).((Chapter 10, Sections10.1b & Chapter 11, Sections11.7a & b; Table 11.4).
4. Identify each of the following from diagrams, indicating their role in muscle contraction (Chapter 11, Sections11.1b,11.2a, b, & c; Section 11.3a):
muscle fiber/cellsarcomeresarcolemma
myofibrilZ lineT tubules
myofilamentI bandsarcoplasmic reticulum
thin & thick filamentsA bandcalcium
actinH bandmyosin head & tail
troponin-tropomyosin complexmotor end-platemotor unit
5. Using structures listed in Objective 4 and the following terms, explain the events that transpire from the time an efferent (motor) neuron is stimulated until a motor unit contracts, indicating where each event occurs (Chapter 11, Sections11.3 &11.4a,b,c & d):
stimulusacetylcholine (ACh)motor endplate
efferent neuronneuromuscular junction (NMJ)acetylcholinesterase
calciumsynaptic vesicles
6. Explain how spinal cord damage might influence muscle activity or movement (Chapter 13, Deeper insight Section 13.5).
7. Recognize the following as they relate to muscle physiology (Chapter 11, Sections11.6a, b,c,& e):
ATPcreatinemyoglobinmuscle atrophy
ADPcreatine phosphatemuscle hypertrophysteroid hormones
8. Relate the following to a sustained muscle contraction (Chapter 11, Sections11.5a & b):
twitchincomplete tetanyfatiguecomplete tetanysummation
9. Draw (or label, if given a drawing) each of the above events (Chapter 11, Sections11.5a & b).
10. Relate isometric and isotonic muscle contractions to muscle use in the body (Chapter 11, Sections11.5c).
11. Relate the refractory period of a skeletal muscle contraction to its functional necessity in cardiac muscle.(Chapter 19, Sections19.4d).
12. Recognize the cause and pathological characteristics of the following disorders (Chapter 11, deeper insight 11.4; Chapter 9, Table 9.1):
muscular dystrophyshin splints
myasthenia gravismuscle strain
